## Data Availabiliity

igaScience requires authors to deposit the dataset(s) supporting the results reported in submitted manuscripts in a publicly-accessible data repository such as GigaDB (see GigaDB database terms of use for complete details). This section should be included when supporting data are available and must include the name of the repository and the permanent identifier or accession number and persistent hyperlinks for the datasets (if appropriate). The following format is recommended:

"The dataset(s) supporting the results of this article is(are) available in the [repository name] repository, [cite unique persistent identifier]."

Submission of data into GigaDB does NOT serve as a substitution for submission of data to community-mandated databases. E.g. genome sequence data must still be submitted to GenBank, ENA, or DDBJ. For a complete list of community available databases please see the Reporting Standards section of our Editorial Policies.

Following the Joint Declaration of Data Citation Principles, where appropriate we ask that the data sets be cited where it is first mentioned in the manuscript, and included in the reference list. If a DOI has been issued to a dataset please always cite it using the DOI rather than the less stable URL the DOI resolves to (e.g., http://dx.doi.org/10.5524/100044 rather than http://gigadb.org/dataset/100044). For more see:

Data Citation Synthesis Group: Joint Declaration of Data Citation Principles. Martone M. (ed.) San Diego CA: FORCE11; 2014 [https://www.force11.org/datacitation]

A list of available scientific research data repositories can be found in res3data and FAIRsharing.

A Data availability statement is required for all papers, and the code snapshots should be cited here.
