## OPENPEDCAN METHODS

### RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

#### Lead contact

Requests for access to OpenPedCan raw data and/or specimens may be directed to, and will be fulfilled by Jo Lynne Rokita (rokita@chop.edu).

#### Materials availability

This study did not create new, unique reagents.

#### Data and code availability

Merged summary files for OpenPedCan v12 are openly accessible in [CAVATICA](https://cavatica.sbgenomics.com/u/cavatica/opentarget) or via download script in the [https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis](https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis) repository.
Cancer group summary data are visible within the NCI's pediatric [Molecular Targets Platform](https://moleculartargets.ccdi.cancer.gov/) and cohort, cancer group, and individual data are visible within [PedcBioPortal](https://pedcbioportal.kidsfirstdrc.org/study/summary?id=openpedcan_v12)

OpenPedCan analysis modules were developed within OpenPBTA [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340], modified based on OpenPBTA, or newly created and can be found within the following publicly available repositories.
OpenPBTA module analyses can be found at [https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis).
OpenPedCan module analyses can be found at [https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis](https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis).
OpenPedCan api code can be found at [https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-api](https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-api).

Software versions are documented in **Table XX**.

#### Data releases


### EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
<!-- TODO: add description of all studies here -->



### METHOD DETAILS

#### Nucleic acids extraction and library preparation
<!-- TODO: add by study here, or refer to publication -->


#### Data generation
<!-- TODO: add by study here, or refer to publication -->


#### DNA WGS Alignment
Please refer to the OpenPBTA manuscript for details [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].

#### Quality Control of Sequencing Data
Please refer to the OpenPBTA manuscript for details [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].


##### SNP calling for B-allele Frequency (BAF) generation
Please refer to the OpenPBTA manuscript for details [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].


#### Somatic Mutation Calling

##### SNV and indel calling
Please refer to the OpenPBTA manuscript for details [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].


##### VCF annotation and MAF creation
<!-- TODO: update VEP version -->


##### Gather SNV and INDEL Hotspots
<!-- TODO: needs update -->


##### Consensus SNV Calling
<!-- TODO: needs update -->


#### Somatic Copy Number Variant Calling (WGS samples only)
<!-- TODO: needs update -->

##### Consensus CNV Calling
<!-- TODO: needs update -->


#### Somatic Structural Variant Calling (WGS samples only)
Please refer to the OpenPBTA manuscript for details [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].


#### Methylation Analysis
<!-- include QC, b-value/m-value calculations, packages, dkfz classification -->


#### Gene Expression

##### Abundance Estimation
<!-- TODO: needs update -->


##### Gene Expression Matrices with Unique HUGO Symbols
<!-- TODO: needs update, include liftover for TCGA/GTEX -->


##### Gene fusion detection
<!-- TODO: needs update -->


### QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

##### Focal Copy Number Calling (`focal-cn-file-preparation` analysis module)



##### Gene Set Variation Analysis (`gene-set-enrichment-analysis` analysis module)
Please refer to the OpenPBTA manuscript for details [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].



##### Fusion prioritization (`fusion_filtering` analysis module)




#### Mutational Signatures (`mutational-signatures` analysis module)



### Tumor Mutation Burden (`snv-callers` analysis module)



#### Clinical Data Harmonization

##### WHO Classification of Disease Types


##### Molecular Subtyping
Here, we build upon the molecular subtyping performed in OpenPBTA [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].

High-grade gliomas..
<!-- TODO: needs update - DHG, IHG -->

In high-grade gliomas, there is a new entity identified in 2021 called infant-type hemispheric gliomas (IHGs), which is characterized with the distinct molecular features of the gene fusion enriched in the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) genes, including ALK, NTRK1/2/3, ROS1 or MET ([@doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-12187-5]). To identify IHG subtype, first samples, which are identified as "IHG" by the DKFZ methylation classifier or diagnosed as "infant type hemispheric glioma with ALK fusion" from free-text pathology report were selected. Then, the correlated RNA-seq data were utilized to seek the evidence for RTK gene fusion. Based on the specific RTK gene fusion present in the samples, IHG would be further classified as "IHG, ALK-altered", "IHG, NTRK-altered", "IHG, ROS1-altered" or "IHG, MET-altered". If no fusion was observed, the samples would be identified as "IHG, To be classified". 


Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors..

Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors (ATRT) is a rare and highly aggressive CNS tumor, composed of poorly differentiated cells with the potential to differentiate into neuroepithelial, epithelial and mesenchymal cells. ATRT is genetically characterized by the biallelic inactivation of SMARCB1. Based on the methylation and transcription profiling, ATRT can be further categorized into three subtypes, "ATRT, MYC", "ATRT, SHH", and "ATRT, TYR". In OpenPedCan, the molecular subtyping of ATRT is based on the DNA methylation data. Briefly, samples with "Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors" pathology diagnosis would be considered as ATRT. To subtyping ATRT, samples with high DKFZ methylation subclass score (>= 0.8) would be selected and the subtyping will be assigned based on the DKFZ methylation subclass. Samples with poor DKFZ methylation subclass score (< 0.8) would be identified as "ATRT, To be classified". 

Neuroblastoma tumors...

Neuroblastoma (NBL) is a type of cancer derived from nerve tissue and usually observed in the kids under age 5. In OpenPedCan, NBL contains the samples with pathology diagnosis of neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, and ganglioneuroma. These samples can be further subtyped based on the status of MYCN amplification. Combining the clinical pathology diagnosis and copy-number variance (CNV) calling from DNA seqeuncing data, samples can be subtyped into "NBL, MYCN amplified" or "NBL, MYCN non-amplified". If free-text pathology diagnosis was "NBL, MYCN non-amplified" while the genetic data suggested MYCN amplification, the samples would be assigned as "NBL, MYCN amplified". On the other hand, if free-text pathology diagnosis was "NBL, MYCN amplified" while the genetic data suggested MYCN non-amplification, gene expression level of MYCN from RNA-seq would be used as a prediction indicator. Samples with MYCN gene expression above/below the cutoff (TPM >= 140.83) would be identified as "NBL, MYCN amplified" and "NBL, MYCN non-amplified", respectively. Samples without DNA sequencing data would also use MYCN gene expression for molecular subtyping. If a sample does not fit none of these situations, this sample would be classified as "NBL, To be classified".  



###### Integration of brain tumor methylation classifications 


#### TP53 Alteration Annotation (`tp53_nf1_score` analysis module)
Please refer to the OpenPBTA manuscript for details [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].


#### Prediction of participants' genetic sex
Please refer to the OpenPBTA manuscript for details [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340].


#### Selection of independent samples (`independent-samples` analysis module)



